I'm talking with Michael Zinman in Yonkers, New York.
Is this where we are?
Arsley, New York.
Arsley.
I thought we were in Yonkers.
We're in Arsley, New York.
Oh, you were teasing me.
I can grab some of this food, right?
We're having a lovely lunch in a room that I described on the way in.
It looks kind of like a CIA safe house.
Well, it is.
It's a house where you keep your books, I guess.
Or some of them.
Some of them.
Let's start with you and start with a couple of screen buffs.
Tell me a little bit about yourself, how the man who runs earthworm and becomes a passionate collector of American inference.
Not accustomed as I am to being paid.
I have always been surrounded with books and had an opportunity as a kid to have access to a bookseller or, let me back it up, a refugee cousin
My family came out of Germany in the late 1930s.
A brilliant guy.
And he wanted to be a teacher, but his English was no good.
He couldn't speak English, but it was too guttural German.
He had a knowledge of, I guess, rare books and books, and he became an Italian bookseller.
His name was Walter Ganz.
And he wound up living a block away from us, my family, as I grew up.
I mean, the guy was a prick, but I was probably the only person who ever had access to his library or to his house or had any interest in him.
Because of that, I at least had a passing knowledge of what books were.
I had some idea of the
How do you want to put it?
The form of the book, both physical and intellectual.
The book as object and the book as object .
It's something of value.
At the time, I used to collect
How old were you?
This was, let's say, my late teens, my teens, you know, high school.
You're a New Yorker, right?
New Yorker.
City?
Monkers.
But I used to, my mother used to go to auctions, local auctions and what I loved.
Did she collect?
She was in some sense, but not a book collector.
Not a book collector, but she would collect, you know, tchotchkes and things and art, and she had a fairly good eye.
What is this brand like?
Mozzarella, fresh mozzarella.
It was made about an hour before we bought it.
I used to hang around the auctions, and I started buying prints.
I'm going to buy some nice prints, you know, early and what have you.
And I would buy books occasionally without any concept of what I was buying, except if they were old or not new, and they were a quarter or whatever.
At some point, I decided I wanted... I got interested in Audubon.
as it was.
I don't know why, but I saw some Audubon prints, folio prints of the quadrupeds, mainly the rafts, and I could buy them for like five bucks a piece.
And I was essentially angry at the fact that this gorgeous stuff was so cheap.
I started buying... But is your background bookish?
Did you read a lot?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, it was curious.
My background was curious.
was quite curious.
Well, professionally, did you describe yourself as a businessman?
No, I was an engineer.
I mean, I studied engineering in Cornell.
What year did you graduate?
I didn't.
This is off the record.
I was invited to leave
And the deal was, if I left and didn't register the next term, they wouldn't try to prosecute me for grand theft.
I stole all the toilet seats in the university the day before the alumni came up.
They were very upset.
They were smiling.
Do you remember the pleasure or you had a reverberation?
No, I remember nothing bad.
The only time I've ever been...
The only time I've ever been embarrassed, and that's something I will tell you about, is with something that I wound up at the HRC.
That's a wonderful story.
I really would like the HRC story.
I will.
Anyway.
Of course, it's not only what I tell it to you, it's ongoing and continuing.
Okay.
Let me also say, parenthetically, that Mel Ellestine, you know, I told him, he applied for the HRC job, but he gave it to Tom Staley, and then he got to get it yet.
Is this... When we get to it, I will give you the true quote to that story that you will regale, you will be omniscient knowing what I'm going to tell you.
You think so?
Okay.
You're going to love it.
You put all this stuff together, right?
Yeah, we wouldn't buy that.
So...
Now, this is not pepperoni.
This is like a cappuccola?
What is it?
Yeah, it's not cappuccola.
It's a soprassata.
Anyway, they make it right there.
Wonderful.
It's not particularly hot today, though.
Anyway, so I started getting interested in Portugan prints.
Must have been around 1958, 59.
And I wanted to buy, I suddenly bought up on Quadra Pets.
And the first books I ever bought that were collectible books, I went to an auction of the Sintas sale, Oscar Benjamin Sintas.
Didn't know what the hell it was.
I bought two books.
They were cheap, 25 bucks.
And I think I was in college at the time.
And I would think the sale was probably 56 or 57.
But I still have one of them.
But shortly thereafter, I started finding out about Audubon and his work.
Why do you have such a ... I've got to type this, so I don't want to say it.
Why do you have such a fascination for Audubon?
I didn't.
But, no, you mentioned him at least three or four times now.
Well, this started, you asked me how I got into the collecting.
There's an aspect of collecting that has to do, in the beginning, with... Keep going, this is not very good, I just want to get it.
concepts of, let's say, value.
Concepts of value.
My feeling is that people who are collectors, who have advanced states of the disease, are incapable of not
using their eyes to measure value in abstract or relative terms, whatever it may be, whether it's a woman's body, whether it's a car, whether it's a picture on the wall, whether it's the price of a meal, whatever it is, there is a type of mentality, a type of mindset that if you say to me, for example,
I just bought this tie for five bucks.
Somehow or other, I will immediately register.
I'm incapable of not registering somewhere in my mind mechanism.
You paid too much, you paid the right price, or you got a bargain.
It was undervalued.
It doesn't matter whatever it may be.
It's a totally unfocused mechanism, but it's there all the time.
You measure value.
And I think that true collectors at some point go through this and are constantly defining what is value, what is the nature of collecting, why do you
go out and fund $25,000 for a fucking book like Moby Dick, okay?
So when somebody copied without the title page and invoiced it to me, one ragged dick.
But I'm saying, why do you go and spend $25,000 for a book?
What is it in the human...
mind, makeup, that people who don't have illimitable funds, because illimitable funds corrupt or take away the pleasure of discretionary choice of money.
When you have something that you're willing to shell out,
It's just the amount of money for it.
Or you have a shelf of books in there that's three feet wide.
It's worth more than your house.
And you're not a guy who's got 50 or 500 million dollars.
You're a guy who's making a living.
And who comes?
What?
We got two.
There's a cup in the cabinet.
You can wash it out in the toilet.
point that I'm getting at is why do people spend money?
I'm getting off on a very... I also think that, you know, we can be vague about this, but I don't think that there are bad results and means, however.
But even so, my means are relatively... Yes, that's true.
Yes, but my means are still relatively limited.
Certainly, they are far more precarious than many other people, and I, you know,
But that's irrelevant.
Oh, I think it's relevant.
The means of this, okay?
Have you ever gone hungry because of purchasing books?
Oh, sure.
Sure.
I once, when I was, I remember at one time there was a... Absolutely.
Well, that's it.
Yeah, I'm curious.
You actually went hungry.
You actually deprived yourself of some human need.
Well, let me tell you the story, okay?
When I was first married, my wife was working as a teacher, and I was struggling, trying to get a business going.
And there used to be, I lived in my plans at the time, and there was a thrift shop, Federated Jewish, a thrift shop or something.
And they had a painting.
I used to buy crap there, nice things, but they had a painting on the wall, a painting they wanted 100 bucks for.
So I offered them, I think at the time, 15 dollars.
And they laughed, and they said, no, blah, blah, blah.
Got a glass?
So I kept going back, because I was on the way home from work.
I used to drive in, I used to take the train home and what have you, and I'd go by.
And for six months, the price was $100.
Then they finally dropped it to $75.
And after about a year, they were dropped at $5 and $10 a week or a month or what have you.
I finally walked in there one day, and they said, Mr. Zimmer,
Finally, you got it.
It's $15.
I said, I'll give you $10.
And they wouldn't sell it.
So I was thinking about it.
I was going down to my... Did you buy it for the $15?
No.
I said, I'll give you $10.
Did you give me $15 a year ago?
Anyway, that weekend, I'm going down to visit my parents.
I'm with my wife.
I stopped off there.
I decide I'll pay the $15 or what have you.
I go in and I buy the pension for $15.
I put it in the car.
My wife says, what did you do?
I said, I just bought this painting.
And she became hysterical.
She said, we have a disconnect notice from the phone.
We have a dispossessed notice from the landlord.
We're three months behind in our rent.
We can't pay our phone.
We can't pay our rent.
We can't pay our electricity.
We can't.
And you're buying paintings?
I said, yeah.
It was cruel.
So yeah.
Nice painting.
It was OK.
I still got it.
That was my next question.
What is it?
A pleasant painting.
My daughter likes it.
I'll give it to her.
An American painting?
Probably.
It's a nondescript painting.
It's a pretty painting.
Is it a pastoral scene?
It's a pastoral scene.
Winter scene of trees.
Me too.
But what I'm getting at is, sure, I'll spend money for books.
I'll spend money.
I've spent hundreds of thousands of dollars
books but to buy a car oh yes hmm at what point did you did you to do it's like the guy who wakes up one day and says i am an alcoholic i'm going through the process um the i know something at what point did you say i'm i'm really possessed i'm obsessed i am driven
When did I admit it?
When did I admit it to myself?
I was doing something quite irrational.
When did I admit it to myself, or when did I admit it to myself verbally irrational?
Well, whatever.
I'd kind of like to know anything about the process.
Okay.
The process is this.
When I started... It's hard to really, I think, to focus or to...
identify that with me but i think it was why because it was an evolutionary sort of thing because there were other competition it was competitive there were competitive demands okay there's competitive demands for time space and money wives um friends uh family or food
You say white, that's plural, I guess.
No, it's the... Well, yes.
Yes, thank you.
Anyway, the point I'm getting at is that... Well, I would just ask that question.
I've talked to people who have lost families because of the obsession of the book.
Of course, it does have a reason.
I'm just trying to find out how often you've been married or how long you've been married.
You did tell me an anecdote about a painting and the wife went crazy over the, you know... Yeah, but she's still my wife.
Well, there you have it.
That's good.
That's an understanding of the wife.
Yeah, you betcha she's understanding.
Anyway, he's my father.
Father's my daughter.
He's also at Leavelin.
You met the wife?
No, I didn't met the wife.
Look, I started collecting art before I started collecting books.
Then I continued to collect art and collect books.
Then I continued to collect a little more books than art.
Then, when I was collecting books, the evolution of me, of my collection, my focus, went from
the idea of Audubon and the anger that Audubon's animals were underappreciated.
I was angry that I could buy a painting or a folio print of Audubon for five bucks.
Because it was a rat.
Then I started asking, where were the originals of all of these things?
Because what you have, you know, the original that they're talking about is a print.
Where are the originals?
Then I started looking around to try to buy the original studies
natural history and i started buying some of those and that sort of you know competed with uh my desire to buy books you know you buy a painting the painting's a good answer much more so you know you're going to buy now as it turned out as far as i was dealing i'm sure a little light is flicking okay let's not look
It's flicking.
Anyway, I went from collecting Audubon to collecting natural history as a general focus.
You can always buy a few books here or there because you're a junkie anyway.
I then decided I wanted to collect American natural history because I found a good reference to it by maximizing over the book on American natural history references.
And I started getting rid of my European natural history and collecting more and more money.
Getting rid of how?
Selling.
I'd sell to dealers who I could then buy.
Did you take a loss?
No, I generally made a lot of money.
As a collector, I have made a great deal of money in my books.
That's very interesting.
Most collectors get screwed.
Most collectors collect for different reasons than I do.
I would say to you that
The collectors who collect for reasons other than prestige generally are extremely successful in measuring.
If one measures success by you make money when you sell it, whether you deal it or do other things with it,
The people who collect books with some reason not to flip them for a profit or with some focus to what they're collecting and some knowledge, it's time and grade.
I spent a lot of time and a lot of money and a lot of effort collecting books.
If I measure the value of my time economically,
that I spend with my books, my book collection costs me a lot of money.
If my income is arbitrarily, as an employee, quarter of a million dollars a year, and I spend 50% of my time... Well, you're not an employee, you're not a company.
It doesn't matter.
I don't own the company, but I'm an editor of the company, but it's still a book.
If my value, my professional value is this, then
If I spend 50% of my time with books, then I have to add to the cost of what I buy the alternate value of my time.
So that people who tell you that if I buy so many books or so many dollars, you have corporate overhead.
One could impute this sort of value, but that's the pleasure of living.
But still in all, what I was getting at is that when I got done collecting, or when I started to shift in area of collecting, I generally was able to dispose of what I collected at a significant profit.
Mainly through dealers?
Yes.
That's pretty good, because dealers will factor in their own markup.
Mainly through dealers.
And I would give a dealer, I mean, Quaritch, for example,
I used to go into one side of Quark and give them my natural history books and go to the other side and buy them out of Americana.
So you go to London to buy books, do you think?
I have quite often.
Regularly.
Could buy American in France?
Yeah.
I don't go to Paris to buy American in London.
Although now, most of them, it's very inefficient to do it.
I wasn't buying American imprints necessarily, I was buying natural history.
So I'm buying natural history.
Then I switched over to American natural history.
Then I switched over to voyages and travels.
Which is really a lovely thing.
Commenting on natural history.
I picked up your cook stuff.
I mean, I've had Columbus letters.
Yeah, I got rid of them.
What happened was, I went from autobahn to natural history, to American natural history, to voyages and travels commenting on natural history,
The voyages and travels in Americana to the New World.
Did this reflect changes in your life?
No, just to... Changes in your intellectual development?
Did this reflect changes in interest?
Did you become void with earlier things?
To some degree, yes.
There's other areas... All of the above.
Yes, to a degree.
They were all less than satisfying or continuing to be satisfying over a long period of time.
One of the other factors that came into play is that if you anticipate a market...
or an area of interest, then you buy at a certain level.
If other people... Maybe before the interest is there.
Whatever, whatever.
Being precocious, in other words.
Determining... Opportunistic.
I started buying natural history, let's say, when natural history was ignored.
Now, so long as it was ignored, you get into a situation where you're willing to pay certain chips for certain things.
Now, if I was buying... Certain chips?
Yeah, economic chips, units, or whatever you want to call it.
If I'm buying quadruple... My type is chips, and it's C-H-I-P-N.
If I buy, if I'm collecting, and one of the things I did was I always collected multiple.
One of the ways I've always looked or moved into an area of collecting is I've always wanted action, as opposed to quality.
Quality.
I wanted quality instead of quality.
You know what I was saying when I said quality?
Yeah.
That's how we got.
I know.
Anyway, but I'm saying to you, I wanted quality instead of quality.
And I wanted to handle... Okay, the difference is this, that I believe collecting is an educated process.
And one of the satisfying ways of dealing with it is handling things.
You've got to handle the goods.
If you handle it tactically, objectively, you know, visually, you learn to discriminate between...
Factorily.
Mole factorily.
Mole factorily too.
Smell it.
You betcha.
I can let you smell some shit I'd want too.
To me, I think that's interject.
A woman wrote a book about the senses and a guy went blind.
He loved his book.
Story about that in the Times today.
It was an article.
Okay.
Today's book review.
Oh, well, the book on the... Some woman, some cunt.
Yeah, she's wonderful.
She let a bat go through her hair or something like that?
Let me ask you.
But anyway, she told me about this guy who went blind, loved his books.
He learned to identify every book in the library by smell.
Is that a great story?
It's not a bad story, is it?
I'm just going to get in my book, I can tell you that.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
I don't even know where we were, but that was my mistake.
Interview was there.
We're talking about a focus of collecting.
Some collectors are passive collectors and want to have form for them a collection, neat, fastidious, and elegant, which is fine.
These are collections.
I guess what I'm drawing again, I don't mean to interrupt, but...
I want to know what you get out of the collection personally.
Do you know it?
Do you feel it?
Do you read it?
Do you absorb it?
What does it do for you other than acquisition and possession?
Okay.
I have no possessive instinct.
I don't believe it.
Let's identify him if it's all right.
William Miller, a pedagogue.
I mean, you say this knowing him.
You say he is not possessive in any way.
But the man is a biblio maniac.
Big difference.
I don't... You said he is a preservationist and a compiler.
And we don't believe, therefore, we need to collect it as well.
No, not possessive.
Possessive.
You say possessive.
You see.
Possessive.
I have a sense of my book.
This is my book.
This is not my book.
Possessive.
This is something that I'm using at the time.
You are a custodian?
Yeah.
Passing along.
But not simply a custodian.
The process.
Do I ever go over the hill?
No!
William Miller.
How do you know Michael?
I'm just curious.
We met at a bookshop.
I was looking to buy a building.
But you seem to have an understanding of the book for us.
No, I'll tell you an excellent story that describes both ends of what we're talking about.
You seem to have some insight.
I'm standing in a bookshop in Hastings.
I'm looking across the street at a building that is for sale, talking to the owner of the shop where I'm social.
We are talking about what this building is worth and if it's worth doing.
It's like a 10-unit building or something like that.
As I'm standing there with my hands in my pocket, a guy walks up to me, stands next to me, looks at the building, looks at me, looks at the building, says, Hey, what do you think?
do a little of this, do a little of that.
I'd make some money on it.
You got the money?
I said, no, I don't have the money.
My name is Zinman, come and see me.
That's how it started.
Out there, in the universe at present, there are littered remains of the course of human events.
Some people come along and curry
those littered remains specialities they farm when you're finished farming and you harvest yourself sometimes you eat sometimes you keep often you sell that's what this process is in this case to a great degree there's a little of this there's a little of that there's a little of that
Until you put it together.
Then once it is together, then it becomes appreciated.
Those parts are greater than less.
How long have you known Michael?
Ten years, 12 years, 15 years.
You studied him?
It sounded like you studied him.
Not as a laboratory animal.
I mean, as an example of human behavior.
I know him.
But I don't think that's unique to Michael.
There are many collectors.
But there are many collectors like that.
Collector dealers, that's the difference.
I mean, before you were talking about collectors, you were talking about people I've never known, and I know a lot of book people.
These seem to be... Oh, Colin Franklin is a collector dealer.
Yeah.
All the bookmen are collector dealers.
This didn't get on the tape.
I said, Leonard, he's showing these collectors.
I said, why did you sell them?
And I said, he goes like this and says, that's nothing going on the tape.
He says, money.
The point is this, that for whatever compelling reason I have to collect
It's not to possess.
Possessing is irrelevant.
It's the action.
Well, Vic Manning says he gave up gambling to collect.
Quote.
He said he loved the baccarat games, he loved the table games, and he was a heavy gambler.
This guy had an interview with John Larroquette.
He gave up booze to become a collector.
So it was kind of like taking one passion and kind of making it more productive.
This is not what I'm suggesting that you've done in any way like that.
Look, like every other messianic asshole, you look for a cause that is just.
I simply, being a collector and accumulating and having the fun, the pleasure that I got was in the act of collecting.
The hunt?
Yeah.
the treasure hunting, just the fun of collecting.
The possessing of the book, as pleasurable as it is, is transitory.
I have, if I'm no longer active, I had probably the, I collected at one time stamps, and the stamps that I collected were revenue stamps, tax paid revenues, and I had a very formidable collection, probably the best collection of beer stamps, of tax paid beer stamps around, and I loved them.
When I decided that books were overwhelming this area of my interest, I didn't pack them away.
I dumped them.
Because if it wasn't alive, I wasn't locking it up and putting it away.
Let me address an apparent contradiction.
Apparent.
And it only goes back to something we were talking about, which I'll raise, and then we can discuss both of you.
You mentioned, as we were talking, that you probably own the finest collections anywhere outside of an institution of American interests.
Is that a fair statement?
Yes.
Certainly the largest.
Okay.
And certainly the most important.
Well, maybe you haven't.
That's not necessarily the finest.
Okay.
Well, what's the difference?
I look at finest as... Fine, I don't mean in terms of condition.
I look at fine in terms of quality, condition, significance.
Now, I don't own, for example, I don't think I own many of the great high spots of American imprints.
I don't have a Bay Songbook.
I don't have a 1648.
It is 13 or 11th.
I don't have a 1648 Cambridge platform.
I got two 1671 Cambridge platforms and four 1680 Cambridge platforms, but the 16471s are all defective in some way.
Is that just you all right?
No.
Not at all.
But there are many people who have, for example, beautiful copies of the Eliot Bible.
Why don't you point out parenthetically that you own three Elliott Bibles?
I own three Elliott Bibles, but I own three second editions, only half of the first edition.
So if you were to have a want list, I don't know if you have a want list, a first Elliott Bible will be yours.
Oh, sure, but only I can buy one tomorrow, but I don't want to spend 400 grand for it.
What would you pay for it?
Between you and me?
I would probably, if it was perfect,
I probably wouldn't be a buyer.
No, I probably wouldn't be a buyer because I think that the premium that it would take to get a perfect copy would be something that I wouldn't want to spend.
But if it was lacking a couple of leaves, I'd like to buy one for about a hundred, a hundred and a quarter.
I'm told that conditions of importance is not essential to you.
Yes, you could say that.
I mean, if you buy things that other people might ask,
Because it is not the... Less and less.
Not that I won't continue to buy them, but less and less that other people will pass.
The idea of perfect or less than perfect in the book business was very much irrationally ascribed to the business of pregnant or not pregnant.
They were absolutes.
And whatever basis the booksellers chose to implicate this in the industry or in the area of collectors,
They successfully did it.
If a book was worth $1,000, the same book, you know, in fine condition, the same book lacking the leaf, the last leaf, for example, was worth $75.
You see much of this today in American fiction, modern American fiction.
Let's check.
Not only dust jackets, but condition.
You take a book that's in vogue, for example, The Murphy's Falcon.
A first edition without a dust jacket today is probably going to be on the market for, I would say, $600 to $1,000.
In poor condition, it's probably $75, or fair condition.
In poor condition, it's $25.
But people read these things.
They're not meant to be treasured and strode.
And the same thing when you have a dust jacket that's worth, you know, seven grand, ten grand, or what have you.
That's irrational.
It's not irrational, but it is a premium that I'm not prepared to pay because I have finite sums of money to buy in a universe that will consume my money.
Would you pay a book for a book for it?
Oh, sure.
So what?
But others would pay a lot more.
I'd like to buy it for like $35.
I mean, the Elliott Bible I bought, I bought three Elliott Bibles, one at auction and two from dealers.
And the last one I bought, I bought this year, and it cost me $8,500.
And it's a wonderful and instructive story about the book world.
The book was brought to the California Book Fair.
And the dealer called me up Sunday night after he came back from the fair and said, would you be interested?
You know, would you have been interested?
Would you have been interested in an Elliott Parable?
I said, I would have been.
Why?
I saw one in California.
I said, was it at the book fair?
He said, yes.
I said, how much was it?
And how complete was it?
He said, he thought it was lacking a couple of leaves, the title page and maybe some of the leaves.
I said, how much was it?
He said, he thought it was like $7,500 or $8,000.
I said,
simply inconceivable.
It is impermissible that an Elliott Bible went through the California Book Fair at eight grand and didn't get bought.
He says, it was there with the fair closed.
And... What was this thing?
Check out?
Wait, I couldn't believe me.
I couldn't believe it.
And I said, well, if you get it, I'm interested.
He called up the dealer.
He said it was being shipped back.
to him and have it, and I went through this whole bizarre world.
I'm surprised you didn't fly up to California.
Wait, you don't have to do things like that necessarily, but you're right, okay?
And back and forth, and it's more preposterous, more preposterous every day.
One day, the guy calls me and says, I got the book.
This is a book dealer in New York.
So I say, bring it up.
He says, I can't.
My car broke down.
I only had one car.
My wife was using it.
I'll come out.
No, don't come out.
And it goes on and on like this.
Two days later, he walks in and hands me the book.
He says, there it is.
And all of these thoughts that I had, I couldn't understand.
I mean, it certainly defied logic.
I couldn't understand this.
There's the book.
He says, look, it's lacking an extra page, which I didn't mind.
And I think I bought it for $9,000.
He paid $8,000, and I bought it for $9,000.
You got it?
Yeah, I bought it.
I got it.
It's over here.
Now, the point I'm saying was... How long ago is this?
The California Book Fair in February.
This year?
Yeah.
So I said to him, it's not that I'm doubting you, and I certainly believe everything you say.
Can you check it out pretty good?
Yes.
It's exactly what you want.
It's the best copy I have.
In the original binding and everything.
So I said to him, that's what I said.
I said, how did this happen?
He says, well... This is supposed to be L.A.
This is supposed to be... He says, well, the book dealer had it on consignment from someone.
He brought it.
He put it in a box and put it under the cabinet because he didn't get around to displaying it.
And I was there and I pulled out the box and I opened it up and there it was.
So it was never displayed.
It was never displayed.
But the thing is that this book dealer, this schmuck, brings the goddamn book to the fair and doesn't display it.
And that's the book.
Can we hear the dealer?
I don't know the dealer.
I'd love to know.
I really don't know the dealer.
I may find out.
But can you imagine?
I think you should.
I mean, this is not a publication.
I don't wish to.
I don't know the dealer.
I wasn't.
But I mean, everything about it.
So realistically, what's the book worth?
Fifty.
No.
You did good.
I did very good.
I did wonderful.
And I was offered another one, but it turned out to be the same book.
Some other dealer knew of a copy of the Elliot's Bible, and I thought it was very interesting.
To get back on track where I was heading, so accepting your assertion that this is arguably the finest, the best, the most important, not the finest.
You've already distinguished between fine and good, and
but the most important collection of American imprints, etc., in private hands.
Understanding that, on the other hand, you say, well, I'll sell it.
Stuff comes and goes, agent collected, dealer collected.
What happens to the collection?
I mean, if it's this important, if it's this significant, do you feel that it must remain as a collection, that it belongs someplace?
Do you feel also that you go out into the world and feed the next generation of collectors?
From my point, when you... Taking into account the suggestion that you are merely a custodian, holding things for the next generation.
So there are a lot of things that I've heard today that are life-resolved.
Let's put it that way.
The tape is running good.
It is good.
This could be good.
History is wonderful.
Huh?
I don't know, and don't presume to know, the mind of other collectors.
Scheide and his father had his grandfather, or Carter Brown, or the Browns, not Carter Brown, but let's say the Brown family, put together great libraries.
And I certainly don't come anywhere near beginning to talk about that.
What happened to me was that if I have a talent, which is simply
or let's say I have some talents.
One of the talents is recognizing value, abstract value, as I was talking to you before.
And in collecting where I was collecting in Bywaters, which are fun, I'm challenging my own intellect.
If I'm in business, I'm a professional in my business.
Here's a challenge.
Can I be a professional as an amateur?
Or a professional amateur?
Or the true sense of the amateur that I can operate.
You don't make a living from it.
Whether you make a living from it or you don't,
You compete with the sharks on equal terms.
Oh, I believe the editor has advantages.
Well, whether they have advantages or not, the question is, I guess, the basic question is, can I buy a book and sell it to a dealer to profit?
Now, there is this very simple litmus test if you want to deal with your sense of value with your eye.
Where I came and where I've come into this situation, or in this position that I'm in today, is that because of the number of circumstances, I was able to, out of many areas of collecting, many, many, many channels that I was collecting in, and I collected the area of the history of printing outside of America, which are the question, or outside of Europe, which I
I'm doing the book on it, we'll publish in the future, which is not, when did the first book get printed in Napoli, but when did the first book get printed in Tananariva, or Matavidea, or Papua New Guinea, what have you.
And I've been collecting missionary imprints and examples of early presses outside of Europe.
And I collected natural history, and I collected, wait, let me just finish this one.
I collected...
and I am collecting, I have a collection of modern American fiction, I have a collection of Bibles, American Bibles, I have a collection, I have lots of areas, American bindings, which you saw, which is a very formidable collection, but those are collections from the basis of, I would say, almost accumulations.
You see things, you buy them, you're a book jockey to the extent you see, you just accumulate, and all of a sudden, the accumulation has some
It reaches a critical mass and becomes a collection.
Now, because of a lot of diverse circumstances... Well, there are general focuses, or foci, or what have you, but they don't necessarily... You don't have to focus, just buy.
And if you can buy within a budget... Don't tell me you're casting out a wide net, pulling in all this shit and pushing, and then calling the good stuff out.
No, you buy everything... You're pulling a lot of crap in the net?
All the time.
If you can't buy crap, you can't differentiate.
You've got to have the crap to see what good it is.
Well, someone has to tell you.
Roger Kennedy of the Smithsonian, Kennedy of the Smithsonian, says to me, we're talking about Texas.
One of the assertions is, they brought so much shit.
This is what people say.
And he said, you know, he said, I believe that you cannot understand the masterpiece unless you look at all the junk that led up to it.
I think, first of all... This is the guy that puts junk on the shelves in the museum, you know?
But first of all, I happen to ascribe to that.
Do you believe that?
I think that it's not a universal statement, but I think that a lot of people can benefit from it.
But that's the man that runs the Smithsonian who's saying this.
But the whole idea of connoisseurship, for example, Berenson didn't buy, you know, 50,000 paintings of shit to be the expert in what he was, but in the little piss-ass world that I live in,
I have found that if I buy everything indiscriminately, I develop a sense of differential value, differential appreciation.
You learn from it.
That's me.
That's not necessarily you or anyone else.
But it happened to work out that because of some events that happened, decisions I had to take, which one had to be with the flood, where I lost a lot of books, none of which were my
Evans material, my early American imprint, so I decided that... Evans meaning what?
Evans, Charles Evans was a bibliography, a bibliographer, who did the primary bibliography on early American imprint, the history of printing in America, the 1800s.
And I realized... So you were going out of punchlines, so to speak.
Yeah, in a very broad way, which is everything.
And what happened was,
I recognized that in my accumulating, in my relative interest, while accumulating in many areas, I had accumulated and brought together a lot of early American imprints.
And the reason I was able to do it was that the area, the primary area I was interested in, which was printing in America before 1700,
It could not be a lot of Americana, if you will, for whatever it was.
Yeah.
So I decided I wanted to buy early American infants.
Could it be done?
Everyone would say it couldn't be done.
The reason it couldn't be done was that A, they're absolutely rare.
B, they had evidence.
They had disappeared from the marketplace so that the dealers could not accumulate enough books to put a catalog on them.
If they got one or two, they'd sell them.
They would go out or what have you.
And it was still at a time when I started buying these things when perfectness was neat, was nice.
And an imperfect book was less than garbage.
So this is where you... This is where I started.
...where you assume the reputation of a guy who will take anything.
I heard you say this, though.
It's true.
We were at a cocktail party in New York, and you talked to a friend of mine.
It was a dude in American Graphic Art.
And you said, I don't give a shit about you.
Of course, I give a shit about it.
But the point is, I'm trying to get the goods.
If I don't tell them, then I'll take it.
They'll never show it to you.
They'll never show it, because they won't think of it.
You can't believe it.
It's like asking Farrah Fawcett for a date, because you're afraid she's going to turn you down.
She's still got two legs in a hole.
I mean, come on.
That's because he's got a woman.
You're one of the people who's willing to take what everybody else was in.
That's right.
You just talked a moment ago about accumulating the vast quantity from which you treat critical mass, from which there grows a collection of work.
Right.
One of the ways you can do that in a crazy world is to take the crimps.
You start with a thing that no one else is looking for.
You do it at a low threshold of financial pain.
You accumulate a vast quantity.
And that somehow takes on a critical mass.
It takes a life of its own.
And you wake up one morning, you have a collection.
You're then increasingly less and less by the shift.
You concentrate on filling in the spaces with the really good stuff.
But what I'm saying, though, is that whether Thomas did it, or Henry Stevens as a dealer did it, or Brindley did it, they all did it.
But what happened was, in my case,
When Henry Huntington came in and bought everything in the 20s, the 1910s and 1910s.
The same members in the teens.
That's right.
He bought everything.
He creamed the market at the time.
And it took literally 60 years for the remnants to start filtering up to the surface.
And over those 60 years, the remnants of what?
the examples of books that escaped his net or the net of the institutions holding these early American imprints.
I'm talking now as an arbitrary cutoff, books printed before 1701.
Now, for whatever it was, the idea of going back to roots or having examples of the early press intrigued me, and I had certain talents to go out and discover them.
Where'd you go?
Tell me a little.
Give me a little.
I went to cellars.
Give me some stories.
I went to the cellar of Quaritch.
Give me some color, as they say.
Okay.
I went to Quaritch.
I went to Francis Edwards.
I went to Mags.
I went into the cellars.
You can't leave.
You get dirty.
You swat.
All the time.
Is it exhilarating?
It's not a question of exhilarating.
Do you know what you're looking for or do you know what it is?
No.
I know what it is when I see it.
And I have a good audience.
Lennon Baskin, which is, you really, you may be the second one, but he showed me some things, and I won't go on, it'll take some time to explain, but he's the artist, and he had some art things, and he made a connection, and it was wonderful.
And I said, but, and so far as I know, it's an unrecorded book, and it's this and that, explaining significance, but the point is, he had no,
idea what it was until the moment he saw it.
But the perception, the insight and the connections were there to say, this is an extraordinary discovery.
Next, it's like smelling pussy.
When you see a woman walk down the street, when you see a woman walking down the street and it's going up and this and this and this and this, you know, you simply know, that's it.
and it's those pharognomes or whatever you want to call it.
Am I describing a sentence?
Absolutely.
Does he have it there when he says that?
Yep.
He showed me this thing.
You know.
Whether you have, everyone has an eye, whether you have an internal eye or what have you, all I'm saying is that when I recognize, and to some degree it was a challenge, but it really was,
something you do without qualification or self-questioning.
If I want to go out, I decided I wanted to buy 17th century American infants.
I wanted to accumulate 17th century, but I had no preconceived... What made you decide in one of these 1700 infants?
I think because...
Do you buy them and absorb them and read them and learn from them?
Are you a scholar in the sense that... I once, I guess, to some degree, I'm not a scholar, but I'm certainly a knowledgeable person in the sense that... Maybe so, when you're writing a book, which sounded very interesting.
Repeat the quote of fortune-mindedness.
Oh, Jesus.
Another time?
No.
I... May I?
Yeah.
This might kill it.
Give me a little first.
I...
I don't want to buy them.
So there was an article about book collectors that was in Forbes magazine some years ago.
And I was interviewed.
Really?
How did they find out about you?
And Stanley Marcus and some other guy.
He does the miniatures.
Yeah.
Little pussy things, right?
How do you stop it?
This thing here?
We're going over on the other side right now.